The Yoruba religion comprises the traditional religious concepts practices of the Yoruba people. It is found primarily in southwestern Nigeria the adjoining parts of Benin, commonly known as Yorubaland. Yoruba religion is ancestral to the American religions Santer a, Umbanda, Candombl . Yoruba religious beliefs are part of itan, the complex cultural concepts which make up the Yoruba society.




According to Kola Abimbola, the Yoruba have evolved a robust cosmology. In brief, it holds that all human beings possess what is known as "Ayanmo" (destiny, fate) are expected to eventually become one in spirit with Olodumare (Olorun, the divine creator source of all energy). Furthermore, the thoughts actions of each person in Ay  (the physical realm/Life) interact with all other living things, including the Earth itself.
Each person attempts to achieve transcendence find their destiny in Orun-Rere (the spiritual realm of those who do good beneficial things). One's ori-inu (spiritual consciousness in the physical realm) must grow in order to consummate union with one's "Iponri" (Ori Orun, spiritual self).
Those who stop growing spiritually, in any of their given lives, are destined for "Orun-Apadi" (the invisible realm of potsherds). Life death are said to be cycles of existence in a series of physical bodies while one's spirit evolves toward transcendence. This evolution is said to be most evident amongst the Orishas, the divine viziers of Olorun.
Iwap l  (or well-balanced) meditative recitation sincere veneration is sufficient to strengthen the ori-inu of most people. Well-balanced people, it is believed, are able to make positive use of the simplest form of connection between their Oris the omnipotent Olu-Orun: an adura (petition or prayer) for divine support.
Prayer to one's Ori Orun produces an immediate sensation of joy. Elegbara (Eshu, not the divine messenger but accuser of the righteous) initiates contact with spiritual realm on behalf of the petitioner, transmits the prayer to Ay ; the deliverer of ase or the spark of life. He transmits this prayer without distorting it in any way. Thereafter, the petitioner may be satisfied with a personal answer. In the event that he or she is not, the If  oracle of the Orisha Orunmila may be consulted. All communication with Orun, whether simplistic in the form of a personal prayer or complicated in the form of that done by an initiated Babalawo (priest of divination), however, is energized by invoking ase.
In the Yoruba belief system, Olodumare has ase over all that is, hence is considered supreme.




Olodumare is the most important "state of existence". Regarded as being all-encompassing, no gender can therefore be assigned. Hence, it is common to hear references to "it" or "they" (although this is meant to address a somewhat singularity) in usual speech. "They" are the owner of all heads, for during human creation, Olodumare gave "emi" (the breath of life) to humankind. In this, Olodumare is Supreme.
Perhaps one of the most important human endeavors extolled within the Yoruba literary corpus is the quest to better one's "Iwa" (character, behaviour). In this way the teachings transcends religious doctrine, advising as it does that a person must better his civic, social intellectual spheres of being; every stanza of the sacred If  oracular poetry (Odu Ifa) has a portion covering the importance of "Iwa". Central to this is the theme of righteousness, both individual collective.



The Yoruba regard Olodumare as the principal agent of creation.
According to a Yoruba account of creation, during a certain stage in this process, the "truth" was sent to confirm the habitability of the newly formed planets. The earth being one of these was visited but deemed too wet for conventional life.
After a successful period of time, a number of divinities led by Obatala were sent to accomplish the task of helping earth develop its crust. On one of their visits to the realm, the arch-divinity Obatala took to the stage equipped with a mollusk that concealed some form of soil; winged beasts some cloth like material. The contents was emptied onto what soon became a large mound on the surface of the water soon after, the winged-beasts began to scatter this around until the point where it gradually made into a large patch of dry land; the various indentations they created eventually becoming hills valleys.
Obatala leaped onto a high-ground named the place Ife. The land became fertile plant life began to flourish. From handfuls of earth he began to mold figurines. Meanwhile, as this was happening on earth, Olodumare gathered the gasses from the far reaches of space sparked an explosion that shaped into a fireball. He subsequently sent it to Ife, where it dried much of the land simultaneously began to bake the motionless figurines. It was at this point that Olodumare released the "breath of life" to blow across the land, the figurines slowly came into "being" as the first people of Ife.
For this reason, Ife is locally referred to as "Ife Oodaye" - "cradle of existence".




An Orisha (spelled  r a) is an entity that possesses the capability of reflecting some of the manifestations of Olodumare. Yoruba Orishas (commonly translated "unique/special/selected heads") are often described as intermediaries between humankind the supernatural. The term is translated as "Deities" or "Divinities" or "Gods".
Orisha(s) are revered for having control over specific elements by nature, thus being better referred to as the divinities or Imole. Even so, there are those of their number that are more akin to ancient heroes and/or sages. These are best addressed as Dema Deities. Even though the term Orisha is often used to describe both classes of divine entities, it is properly reserved for the former one.



Irunmole are entities sent by Olorun to complete given tasks, often acting as liaisons between Orun (the invisible realm) Aiye (the physical realm). Irunmole(s) can best be described as ranking divinities; whereby such divinities are regarded as the principal Orishas. Irunmole, from "Erinrun" - 400, "Imole" - Divinites or Divine Spirits




The Yoruba believe in Atunwa, reincarnation within the family. The names Babatunde (father returns), Yetunde (Mother returns), Babatunji (Father wakes once again) Sotunde (The wise man returns) all offer vivid evidence of the Ifa concept of familial or lineal rebirth. There is no simple guarantee that your grandfather or great uncle will "come back" in the birth of your child, however.
Whenever the time arrives for a spirit to return to Earth (otherwise known as The Marketplace) through the conception of a new life in the direct bloodline of the family, one of the component entities of a person's being returns, while the other remains in Heaven (Ikole Orun). The spirit that returns does so in the form of a Guardian Ori. One's Guardian Ori, which is represented contained in the crown of the head, represents not only the spirit energy of one's previous blood relative, but the accumulated wisdom he or she has acquired through a myriad of lifetimes. This is not to be confused with one s spiritual Ori, which contains personal destiny, but instead refers to the coming back to The Marketplace of one's personal blood Ori through one's new life experiences. The Primary Ancestor (which should be identified in your Itefa) becomes   if you are aware work with that specific energy   a  guide  for the individual throughout their lifetime. At the end of that life they return to their identical spirit self merge into one, taking the additional knowledge gained from their experience with the individual as a form of payment.




According to Professor S. A. Akintoye, the Yoruba were exquisite statesmen who spread across the globe in an unprecedented fashion; the reach of their culture is largely due to migration the most recent migration occurred with the Atlantic slave trade. During this period, many Yoruba were captured sold into the slave trade transported to Argentina, Brazil, Cuba, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico, Trinidad Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela, other parts of the Americas. With them, they carried their religious beliefs. The school-of-thought integrated into what now constitutes the core of the "New World lineages":
Candombl  (Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay)
Santer a (Cuba, Puerto Rico, Dominican Republic)
Trinidad Orisha (Trinidad Tobago)
Umbanda (Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay)



The Vodun faith, which originated amongst a different ethnic group (the Gbe speaking peoples of present-day Benin, Togo, Ghana), shares some similarities with the Yoruba faith, may even be taken to be theologically related on some levels.