Yosemite National Park (/jo s m ti/ yoh-SEM-it-ee) is a United States National Park spanning eastern portions of Tuolumne, Mariposa Madera counties in the central eastern portion of the U.S. state of California, commonly referred to as Northern California. The park, which is managed by the National Park Service, covers an area of 747,956 acres (1,168.681 sq mi; 302,687 ha; 3,026.87 km2) reaches across the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada mountain chain. Over 3.7 million people visit Yosemite each year: most spend the majority of their time in the seven square miles (18 km2) of Yosemite Valley. Designated a World Heritage Site in 1984, Yosemite is internationally recognized for its spectacular granite cliffs, waterfalls, clear streams, giant sequoia groves, biological diversity. Almost 95% of the park is designated wilderness. Yosemite was central to the development of the national park idea. First, Galen Clark others lobbied to protect Yosemite Valley from development, ultimately leading to President Abraham Lincoln's signing the Yosemite Grant in 1864. Later, John Muir led a successful movement to establish a larger national park encompassing not just the valley, but surrounding mountains forests as well paving the way for the United States national park system.
Yosemite is one of the largest least fragmented habitat blocks in the Sierra Nevada, the park supports a diversity of plants animals. The park has an elevation range from 2,127 to 13,114 feet (648 to 3,997 m) contains five major vegetation zones: chaparral/oak woodland, lower montane forest, upper montane forest, subalpine zone, alpine. Of California's 7,000 plant species, about 50% occur in the Sierra Nevada more than 20% within Yosemite. There is suitable habitat or documentation for more than 160 rare plants in the park, with rare local geologic formations unique soils characterizing the restricted ranges many of these plants occupy.
The geology of the Yosemite area is characterized by granitic rocks remnants of older rock. About 10 million years ago, the Sierra Nevada was uplifted then tilted to form its relatively gentle western slopes the more dramatic eastern slopes. The uplift increased the steepness of stream river beds, resulting in formation of deep, narrow canyons. About 1 million years ago, snow ice accumulated, forming glaciers at the higher alpine meadows that moved down the river valleys. Ice thickness in Yosemite Valley may have reached 4,000 feet (1,200 m) during the early glacial episode. The downslope movement of the ice masses cut sculpted the U-shaped valley that attracts so many visitors to its scenic vistas today.
The name "Yosemite" (meaning "killer" in Miwok) originally referred to the name of a renegade tribe which was driven out of the area (and possibly annihilated) by the Mariposa Battalion. Before then the area was called "Ahwahnee" ("big mouth") by indigenous people. As revealed by archeological finds, the Yosemite Valley has been inhabited for nearly 3,000 years, though humans may have first visited the area as long as 8,000 to 10,000 years ago. The indigenous natives called themselves the Ahwahneechee, meaning "dwellers in Ahwahnee." They are related to the Northern Paiute Mono tribes. Many tribes visited the area to trade, including nearby Central Sierra Miwoks, who lived along the drainage area of the Tuolumne Stanislaus Rivers. A major trading route went over Mono Pass through Bloody Canyon to Mono Lake, just to the east of the Yosemite area. Vegetation game in the region was similar to that present today; acorns were a staple to their diet, as well as other seeds plants, salmon deer.
The California Gold Rush in the mid-19th century dramatically increased travel by European-Americans in the area, causing competition for resources between the regional Paiute Miwok the miners hangers on. In 1851 as part of the Mariposa Wars intended to suppress Native American resistance, United States Army Major Jim Savage led the Mariposa Battalion into the west end of Yosemite Valley. He was pursuing forces of around 200 Ahwahneechee led by Chief Tenaya.
Accounts from this battalion were the first well-documented reports of ethnic Europeans entering Yosemite Valley. Attached to Savage's unit was Dr. Lafayette Bunnell, the company physician, who later wrote about his awestruck impressions of the valley in The Discovery of the Yosemite. Bunnell is credited with naming Yosemite Valley, based on his interviews with Chief Tenaya. Bunnell wrote that Chief Tenaya was the founder of the Pai-Ute Colony of Ah-wah-nee. The Miwok, a neighboring tribe, most white settlers considered the Ahwahneechee to be especially violent because of their frequent territorial disputes. The Miwok term for the Pai-Ute band was yohhe'meti, meaning "they are killers". Correspondence articles written by members of the battalion helped to popularize the natural wonders of the Yosemite Valley the surrounding area.
Chief Tenaya his Ahwahneechee were eventually captured their village burned; they were removed to a reservation near Fresno, California. The chief some others were later allowed to return to Yosemite Valley. In the spring of 1852 they attacked a group of eight gold miners, then moved east to flee law enforcement. Near Mono Lake, they took refuge with the nearby Mono tribe of Paiute. They stole horses from their hosts moved away, but the Mono Paiutes tracked down killed many of the Ahwahneechee, including Chief Tenaya. The Mono Paiute took the survivors as captives back to Mono Lake absorbed them into the Mono Lake Paiute tribe.
A reconstructed "Indian Village of Ahwahnee" has been erected behind the Yosemite Museum, located next to the Yosemite Valley Visitor Center.



In 1855, entrepreneur James Mason Hutchings, artist Thomas Ayres two others were the first to tour the area. Hutchings Ayres were responsible for much of the earliest publicity about Yosemite, writing articles special magazine issues about the Valley. Ayres' style in art was highly detailed with exaggerated angularity. His works written accounts were distributed nationally, an art exhibition of his drawings was held in New York City. Hutchings' publicity efforts between 1855 1860 led to an increase in tourism to Yosemite.
Wawona was an Indian encampment in what is now the southwestern part of the park. Settler Galen Clark discovered the Mariposa Grove of giant sequoia in Wawona in 1857. He had simple lodgings built, roads to the area. In 1879, the Wawona Hotel was built to serve tourists visiting Mariposa Grove. As tourism increased, so did the number of trails hotels developed by people intending to build on the trade.
The Wawona Tree, known as the Tunnel Tree, was a famous giant sequoia that stood in the Mariposa Grove. It was 227 feet (69 m) tall, was 90 ft (27 m) in circumference. When a carriage-wide tunnel was cut through the tree in 1881, it became even more popular as a tourist photo attraction. Everything from horse-drawn carriages in the late 19th century, to automobiles in the first part of the 20th century, traveled the road which passed through that tree. The Wawona Tree fell in 1969 under a heavy load of snow. It was estimated to have been 2,300 years old.

Yosemite's first concession was established in 1884 when John Degnan his wife established a bakery store. In 1916, the National Park Service granted a 20-year concession to the Desmond Park Service Company. It bought out or built hotels, stores, camps, a dairy, a garage, other park services. Desmond changed its name to the Yosemite National Park Company in December 1917 was reorganized in 1920.
The Curry Company had been started in 1899 by David Jennie Curry to provide concessions in the park. They founded Camp Curry, now known as Curry Village. The Currys lobbied reluctant park supervisors to allow expansion of concession operations development in the area.
Administrators in the National Park Service felt that limiting the number of concessionaires in each national park would be more financially sound. The Curry Company its rival, the Yosemite National Park Company, were forced to merge in 1925 to form the Yosemite Park & Curry Company (YP&CC). The company built the Ahwahnee Hotel in 1927.




Concerned by the effects of commercial interests, prominent citizens including Galen Clark Senator John Conness advocated for protection of the area. A park bill was prepared with the assistance of the General Land Office in the Interior Department. The bill passed both houses of the 38th United States Congress, was signed by President Abraham Lincoln on June 30, 1864, creating the Yosemite Grant. This is the first instance of park land being set aside specifically for preservation public use by action of the U.S. federal government, set a precedent for the 1872 creation of Yellowstone as the first national park. Yosemite Valley the Mariposa Grove were ceded to California as a state park, a board of commissioners was proclaimed two years later.
Galen Clark was appointed by the commission as the Grant's first guardian, but neither Clark nor the commissioners had the authority to evict homesteaders (which included Hutchings). The issue was not settled until 1872 when the homesteader land holdings were invalidated by the U.S. Supreme Court. Clark the reigning commissioners were ousted in 1880, this dispute reaching the Supreme Court in 1880. The two Supreme Court decisions affecting management of the Yosemite Grant are considered important precedents in land management law. Hutchings became the new park guardian.
Access to the park by tourists improved in the early years of the park, conditions in the Valley were made more hospitable. Tourism significantly increased after the First Transcontinental Railroad was completed in 1869, but the long horseback ride to reach the area was a deterrent. Three stagecoach roads were built in the mid-1870s to provide better access for the growing number of visitors to Yosemite Valley.
John Muir was a Scottish-born American naturalist explorer. It was because of Muir that many National Parks were left untouched, such as Yosemite Valley National Park. One of the most significant camping trip Muir took was in 1903 with then president Theodore Roosevelt. This trip persuaded Roosevelt to return "Yosemite Valley Mariposa Grove to federal protection as part of Yosemite National Park".
John Muir wrote articles popularizing the area increasing scientific interest in it. Muir was one of the first to theorize that the major landforms in Yosemite Valley were created by large alpine glaciers, bucking established scientists such as Josiah Whitney, who regarded Muir as an amateur. Muir wrote scientific papers on the area's biology. Landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted emphasized the importance of conservation of Yosemite Valley.




Overgrazing of meadows (especially by sheep), logging of giant sequoia, other damage caused Muir to become an advocate for further protection. Muir convinced prominent guests of the importance of putting the area under federal protection; one such guest was Robert Underwood Johnson, editor of Century Magazine. Muir Johnson lobbied Congress for the Act that created Yosemite National Park on October 1, 1890. The State of California, however, retained control of Yosemite Valley Mariposa Grove. Muir helped persuade local officials to virtually eliminate grazing from the Yosemite high country.
The newly created national park came under the jurisdiction of the United States Army's Troop I of the 4th Cavalry on May 19, 1891, which set up camp in Wawona with Captain Abram Epperson Wood as acting superintendent. By the late 1890s, sheep grazing was no longer a problem, the Army made many other improvements. The cavalry could not intervene to ease the worsening condition of Yosemite Valley Mariposa Grove. The cavalry left another legacy in the park, the ranger hat. From 1899 to 1913, cavalry regiments of the Western Department, including the all Black 9th Cavalry (known as the "Buffalo Soldiers") the 1st Cavalry, stationed two troops at Yosemite brought with them the trooper's campaign hat with its distinctive Montana Peak we recognize today as the "ranger hat." This peak had been formed into the trooper's stetson by veterans of the 1898 Spanish American War to better shed tropical rain.

Muir his Sierra Club continued to lobby the government influential people for the creation of a unified Yosemite National Park. In May 1903, President Theodore Roosevelt camped with Muir near Glacier Point for three days. On that trip, Muir convinced Roosevelt to take control of Yosemite Valley Mariposa Grove away from California return it to the federal government. In 1906, Roosevelt signed a bill that did precisely that.




The National Park Service was formed in 1916, Yosemite was transferred to that agency's jurisdiction. Tuolumne Meadows Lodge, Tioga Pass Road, campgrounds at Tenaya Merced lakes were completed in 1916. Automobiles started to enter the park in ever-increasing numbers following the construction of all-weather highways to the park. The Yosemite Museum was founded in 1926 through the efforts of Ansel Franklin Hall.
In 1903, a dam in the northern portion of the park was proposed. Located in the Hetch Hetchy Valley, its purpose was to provide water hydroelectric power to San Francisco. Muir the Sierra Club opposed the project, while others, including Gifford Pinchot, supported it. In 1913, the U.S. Congress authorized the O'Shaughnessy Dam through passage of the Raker Act.
In the late 1920s, in an attempt that would be impossible to make today, a bid for Yosemite for the 1932 Winter Olympics was put forward. (Ultimately, Lake Placid, New York, hosted.)

More recently, preservationists persuaded Congress to designate 677,600 acres (274,200 ha), or about 89% of the park, as the Yosemite Wilderness a highly protected wilderness area. The Park Service has reduced artificial inducements to visit the park, such as the Firefall, in which red-hot embers were pushed off a cliff near Glacier Point at night. Traffic congestion in Yosemite Valley during the summer months has become a concern. Two electric buses commenced service in September 1995. The buses are quiet do not emit pollutants. Eventually, all the buses in Yosemite will be electric. The 1996 Yosemite Valley Landslide killed a hiker the January 1997 Merced River flood damaged many roads several campgrounds.




Yosemite National Park is located in the central Sierra Nevada of California. Three wilderness areas are adjacent to Yosemite: the Ansel Adams Wilderness to the southeast, the Hoover Wilderness to the northeast, the Emigrant Wilderness to the north.
The 1,189 sq mi (3,080 km2) park is roughly the size of the U.S. state of Rhode Island contains thousands of lakes ponds, 1,600 miles (2,600 km) of streams, 800 miles (1,300 km) of hiking trails, 350 miles (560 km) of roads. Two federally designated Wild Scenic Rivers, the Merced the Tuolumne, begin within Yosemite's borders flow westward through the Sierra foothills, into the Central Valley of California. Annual park visitation exceeds 3.5 million, with most visitor use concentrated in the seven-square-mile (18 km2) area of Yosemite Valley.




Almost all of the landforms in the Yosemite area are cut from the granitic rock of the Sierra Nevada Batholith (a batholith is a large mass of intrusive igneous rock that formed deep below the surface). About 5% of the park's landforms (mostly in its eastern margin near Mount Dana) are metamorphosed volcanic sedimentary rocks. These rocks are called roof pendants because they were once the roof of the underlying granitic rock.
Erosion acting upon different types of uplift-created joint fracture systems is responsible for creating the valleys, canyons, domes, other features we see today. These joints fracture systems do not move, are therefore not faults. Spacing between joints is controlled by the amount of silica in the granite granodiorite rocks; more silica tends to create a more resistant rock, resulting in larger spaces between joints fractures.
Pillars columns, such as Washington Column Lost Arrow, are created by cross joints. Erosion acting on master joints is responsible for creating valleys later canyons. The single most erosive force over the last few million years has been large alpine glaciers, which have turned the previously V-shaped river-cut valleys into U-shaped glacial-cut canyons (such as Yosemite Valley Hetch Hetchy Valley). Exfoliation (caused by the tendency of crystals in plutonic rocks to expand at the surface) acting on granitic rock with widely spaced joints is responsible for creating domes such as Half Dome North Dome inset arches like Royal Arches.




Yosemite Valley represents only one percent of the park area, but this is where most visitors arrive stay. The Tunnel View is the first view of the Valley for many visitors is extensively photographed. El Capitan, a prominent granite cliff that looms over Yosemite Valley, is one of the most popular rock climbing destinations in the world because of its diverse range of climbing routes in addition to its year-round accessibility. Granite domes such as Sentinel Dome Half Dome rise 3,000 4,800 feet (910 1,460 m), respectively, above the valley floor.
The high country of Yosemite contains beautiful areas such as Tuolumne Meadows, Dana Meadows, the Clark Range, the Cathedral Range, the Kuna Crest. The Sierra crest the Pacific Crest Trail run through Yosemite, with peaks of red metamorphic rock, such as Mount Dana Mount Gibbs, granite peaks, such as Mount Conness. Mount Lyell is the highest point in the park, standing at 13,120 feet (4,000 m). The Lyell Glacier is the largest glacier in Yosemite National Park is one of the few remaining in the Sierra Nevada today.
The park has three groves of ancient giant sequoia (Sequoiadendron giganteum) trees; the Mariposa Grove (200 trees), the Tuolumne Grove (25 trees), the Merced Grove (20 trees). This species grows larger in volume than any other is one of the tallest longest-lived.



Tuolumne Merced River systems originate along the crest of the Sierra Nevada in the park have carved river canyons 3,000 to 4,000 feet (910 to 1,220 m) deep. The Tuolumne River drains the entire northern portion of the park, an area of approximately 680 square miles (1,800 km2). The Merced River begins in the park's southern peaks, primarily the Cathedral Clark Ranges, drains an area of approximately 511 square miles (1,320 km2).

Hydrologic processes, including glaciation, flooding, fluvial geomorphic response, have been fundamental in creating landforms in the park. The park contains approximately 3,200 lakes (greater than 100 m2), two reservoirs, 1,700 miles (2,700 km) of streams, all of which help form these two large watersheds. Wetlands in Yosemite occur in valley bottoms throughout the park, are often hydrologically linked to nearby lakes rivers through seasonal flooding groundwater movement. Meadow habitats, distributed at elevations from 3,000 to 11,000 feet (910 to 3,350 m) in the park, are generally wetlands, as are the riparian habitats found on the banks of Yosemite's numerous streams rivers.

Yosemite is famous for its high concentration of waterfalls in a small area. Numerous sheer drops, glacial steps hanging valleys in the park provide many places for waterfalls to exist, especially during April, May, June (the snowmelt season). Located in Yosemite Valley, the Yosemite Falls is the highest in North America at 2,425-foot (739 m). Also in Yosemite Valley is the much lower volume Ribbon Falls, which has the highest single vertical drop, 1,612 feet (491 m). Perhaps the most prominent of the Yosemite Valley waterfalls is Bridalveil Fall, which is the waterfall seen from the Tunnel View viewpoint at the east end of the Wawona Tunnel. Wapama Falls in Hetch Hetchy Valley is another notable waterfall. Hundreds of ephemeral waterfalls exist in the park.

All glaciers in the park are relatively small glaciers that occupy areas that are in almost permanent shade, such as north- northeast-facing cirques. Lyell Glacier is the largest glacier in Yosemite (the Palisades Glaciers are the largest in the Sierra Nevada) covers 160 acres (65 ha). None of the Yosemite glaciers are a remnant of the much, much larger Ice Age alpine glaciers responsible for sculpting the Yosemite landscape. Instead, they were formed during one of the neoglacial episodes that have occurred since the thawing of the Ice Age (such as the Little Ice Age). Climate change has reduced the number size of glaciers around the world. Many Yosemite glaciers, including Merced Glacier, which was discovered by John Muir in 1871 bolstered his glacial origins theory of the Yosemite area, have disappeared most of the others have lost up to 75% of their surface area.




Yosemite has a Mediterranean climate (K ppen climate classification Csa), meaning most precipitation falls during the mild winter, the other seasons are nearly dry (less than 3% of precipitation falls during the long, hot summers). Because of orographic lift, precipitation increases with elevation up to 8,000 feet (2,400 m) where it slowly decreases to the crest. Precipitation amounts vary from 36 inches (910 mm) at 4,000 feet (1,200 m) elevation to 50 inches (1,300 mm) at 8,600 feet (2,600 m). Snow does not typically persist on the ground until November in the high country. It accumulates all winter into March or early April.
Mean daily temperatures range from 25  F ( 4  C) to 53  F (12  C) at Tuolumne Meadows at 8,600 feet (2,600 m). At the Wawona Entrance (elevation 5,130 feet or 1,560 metres), mean daily temperature ranges from 36 to 67  F (2 to 19  C). At the lower elevations below 5,000 feet (1,500 m), temperatures are hotter; the mean daily high temperature at Yosemite Valley (elevation 3,966 feet or 1,209 metres) varies from 46 to 90  F (8 to 32  C). At elevations above 8,000 feet (2,400 m), the hot, dry summer temperatures are moderated by frequent summer thunderstorms, along with snow that can persist into July. The combination of dry vegetation, low relative humidity, thunderstorms results in frequent lightning-caused fires as well.
At the park headquarters, with an elevation of 3,966 feet (1,209 m), January averages 38.2  F (3.4  C), while July averages 73.0  F (22.8  C), though in summer the nights are much cooler than the hot days. There are an average of 39.5 days with highs of 90  F (32  C) or higher an average of 97.9 nights with freezing temperatures. Freezing temperatures have been recorded in every month of the year. The record high temperature was 115  F (46  C) on July 20, 1915, while the record low temperature was  6  F ( 21  C) on January 2, 1924 on January 21, 1937. Average annual precipitation is nearly 37 inches (940 mm), falling on 65 days. The wettest year was 1983 with 68.94 inches (1,751 mm) the driest year was 1976 with 14.84 inches (377 mm). The most precipitation in one month was 29.61 inches (752 mm) in December 1955 the most in one day was 6.92 inches (176 mm) on December 23, 1955. Average annual snowfall is 65.6 inches (1.67 m). The snowiest year was 1967 with 154.9 inches (3.93 m). The most snow in one month was 140.8 inches (3.58 m) in January 1993.







The area of the park was astride a passive continental margin during the Precambrian early Paleozoic. Sediment was derived from continental sources was deposited in shallow water. These rocks have since been metamorphosed.
Heat generated from the Farallon Plate subducting below the North American Plate led to the creation of an island arc of volcanoes on the west coast of proto-North America between the late Devonian Permian periods. Later volcanism in the Jurassic intruded covered these rocks in what may have been magmatic activity associated with the early stages of the creation of the Sierra Nevada Batholith. 95% of these rocks were eventually removed by uplifted-accelerated erosion.
The first phase of regional plutonism started 210 million years ago in the late Triassic continued throughout the Jurassic to about 150 million years before present (BP). Around the same time, the Nevadan orogeny built the Nevadan mountain range (also called the Ancestral Sierra Nevada) to a height of 15,000 feet (4,600 m). This was directly part of the creation of the Sierra Nevada Batholith, the resulting rocks were mostly granitic in composition emplaced about 6 miles (9.7 km) below the surface. The second major pluton emplacement phase lasted from about 120 million to 80 million years ago during the Cretaceous. This was part of the Sevier orogeny.
Starting 20 million years ago (in the Cenozoic) lasting until 5 million years ago, a now-extinct extension of Cascade Range volcanoes erupted, bringing large amounts of igneous material in the area. These igneous deposits blanketed the region north of the Yosemite region. Volcanic activity persisted past 5 million years BP east of the current park borders in the Mono Lake Long Valley areas.



Starting 10 million years ago, vertical movement along the Sierra fault started to uplift the Sierra Nevada. Subsequent tilting of the Sierra block the resulting accelerated uplift of the Sierra Nevada increased the gradient of western-flowing streams. The streams consequently ran faster thus cut their valleys more quickly. Additional uplift occurred when major faults developed to the east, especially the creation of Owens Valley from Basin Range-associated extensional forces. Uplift of the Sierra accelerated again about two million years ago during the Pleistocene.

The uplifting increased erosion exposed granitic rocks in the area to surface pressures, resulting in exfoliation (responsible for the rounded shape of the many domes in the park) mass wasting following the numerous fracture joint planes (cracks; especially vertical ones) in the now solidified plutons. Pleistocene glaciers further accelerated this process the larger ones transported the resulting talus till from valley floors.
Numerous vertical joint planes controlled where how fast erosion took place. Most of these long, linear very deep cracks trend northeast or northwest form parallel, often regularly spaced sets. They were created by uplift-associated pressure release by the unloading of overlying rock via erosion.



A series of glaciations further modified the region starting about 2 to 3 million years ago ending sometime around 10,000 BP. At least four major glaciations have occurred in the Sierra Nevada, locally called the Sherwin (also called the pre-Tahoe), Tahoe, Tenaya, Tioga. The Sherwin glaciers were the largest, filling Yosemite other valleys, while later stages produced much smaller glaciers. A Sherwin-age glacier was almost surely responsible for the major excavation shaping of Yosemite Valley other canyons in the area.
Glacial systems reached depths of up to 4,000 feet (1,200 m) left their marks in the Yosemite area. The longest glacier in the Yosemite area ran down the Grand Canyon of the Tuolumne River for 60 miles (97 km), passing well beyond Hetch Hetchy Valley. Merced Glacier flowed out of Yosemite Valley into the Merced River Gorge. Lee Vining Glacier carved Lee Vining Canyon emptied into Lake Russel (the much-enlarged ice age version of Mono Lake). Only the highest peaks, such as Mount Dana Mount Conness, were not covered by glaciers. Retreating glaciers often left recessional moraines that impounded lakes such as the 5.5 miles (9 km) long Lake Yosemite (a shallow lake that periodically covered much of the floor of Yosemite Valley).







With its scrubby sun-baked chaparral, stately groves of pine, fir, sequoia, expanses of alpine woodlands meadows, Yosemite National Park preserves a Sierra Nevada landscape as it prevailed before Euro-American settlement. In contrast to surrounding lands, which have been significantly altered by logging, the park still contains some 225,510 acres (91,260 ha) of old-growth forest. Taken together, the park's varied habitats support over 250 species of vertebrates, which include fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals.

Along much of Yosemite's western boundary, habitats are dominated by mixed coniferous forests of ponderosa pine, sugar pine, incense cedar, white fir, Douglas fir, a few stands of giant sequoia, interspersed by areas of black oak canyon live oak. A relatively high diversity of wildlife species is supported by these habitats, because of relatively mild, lower-elevation climate the mixture of habitat types plant species. Wildlife species typically found in these habitats include American black bear, bobcat, cougar, gray fox, mule deer, mountain kingsnake, Gilbert's skink, white-headed woodpecker, brown creeper, spotted owl, a wide variety of bat species.
Going higher in elevation, the coniferous forests become purer stands of red fir, western white pine, Jeffrey pine, lodgepole pine, the occasional foxtail pine. Fewer wildlife species tend to be found in these habitats, because of their higher elevation lower complexity. Species likely to be found include golden-mantled ground squirrel, chickaree, fisher, Steller's jay, hermit thrush, northern goshawk. Reptiles are not common, but include rubber boa, western fence lizard, northern alligator lizard.

As the landscape rises, trees become smaller more sparse, with stands broken by areas of exposed granite. These include lodgepole pine, whitebark pine, mountain hemlock that, at highest elevations, give way to vast expanses of granite as treeline is reached. The climate in these habitats is harsh the growing season is short, but species such as pika, yellow-bellied marmot, white-tailed jackrabbit, Clark's nutcracker, black rosy finch are adapted to these conditions. Also, the treeless alpine habitats are the areas favored by Sierra Nevada bighorn sheep. This species, however, is now found in the Yosemite area only around Tioga Pass, where a small, reintroduced population exists.
At a variety of elevations, meadows provide important, productive habitat for wildlife. Animals come to feed on the green grasses use the flowing standing water found in many meadows. Predators, in turn, are attracted to these areas. The interface between meadow forest is favored by many animal species because of the proximity of open areas for foraging cover for protection. Species that are highly dependent upon meadow habitat include great grey owl, willow flycatcher, Yosemite toad, mountain beaver.




Despite the richness of high-quality habitats in Yosemite, the brown bear, California condor, least Bell's vireo have become extinct in the park within historical time, another 37 species currently have special status under either California or federal endangered species legislation. The most serious current threats to Yosemite's wildlife the ecosystems they occupy include loss of a natural fire regime, exotic species, air pollution, habitat fragmentation, climate change. On a more local basis, factors such as road kills the availability of human food have affected some wildlife species.

The black bears of Yosemite were once famous for breaking into parked cars to steal food. They were an encouraged tourist sight for many years at the park's garbage dumps, where bears congregated to eat park visitors' garbage tourists gathered to photograph the bears. Increasing encounters between bears humans increasing damage to property led to an aggressive campaign to discourage bears from relying on human food or interacting with people their property. The open-air dumps were closed; all trash receptacles were replaced with bear-proof receptacles; all campgrounds were equipped with bear-proof food lockers so that people would not leave food in their vehicles, which were easy targets for the powerful resourceful bears. Because bears who show aggression towards people usually are eventually destroyed, park personnel have continued to come up with innovative ways to have bears associate humans their property with unpleasant experiences, such as being hit with rubber bullets. Today, about 30 bears a year are captured ear-tagged their DNA is sampled so that, when bear damage occurs, rangers can ascertain which bear is causing the problem.
Increasing ozone pollution is causing tissue damage to the massive giant sequoia trees in the park. This makes them more vulnerable to insect infestation disease. Since the cones of these trees require fire-touched soil to germinate, historic fire suppression has reduced these trees' ability to reproduce. The current policy of setting prescribed fires is expected to help the germination issue.
Yosemite National Park has documented more than 130 non-native plant species within park boundaries. These non-native plants were introduced into Yosemite following the migration of early Euro-American settlers in the late 1850s. Natural human-caused disturbances, such as wildland fires construction activities, have contributed to a rapid increase in the spread of non-native plants. A number of these species aggressively invade displace the native plant communities, resulting in impacts on the park's resources. Non-native plants can bring about significant changes in park ecosystems by altering the native plant communities the processes that support them. Some non-native species may cause an increase in the fire frequency of an area or increase the available nitrogen in the soil that may allow more non-native plants to become established. Many non-native species, such as yellow star thistle (Centaurea solstitialis), are able to produce a long tap root that allows them to out-compete the native plants for available water.
Bull thistle (Cirsium vulgare), common mullein (Verbascum thapsus), Klamath weed (Hypericum perforatum) have been identified as noxious pests in Yosemite since the 1940s. Additional species that have been recognized more recently as aggressive requiring control are yellow star thistle (Centaurea solstitialis), sweet clover (Melilot spp.), Himalayan blackberry (Rubus armeniacus), cut-leaved blackberry (Rubus laciniatus) large periwinkle (Vinca major).




Forest fires seasonally clear the park of dead vegetation, making way for new growth. These fires are detrimental to the ecology of the park, damage the income generated by tourism. The Summer of Fire saw more resources dedicated to the subject of wildfire than ever before or since in the United States. The most recent fire, the Rim Fire, which destroyed nearly $2 billion in assets revenue, closed off much of the park to tourists. This rim fire was the third largest on record, burned nearly 500 acres of wild habitat.




Yosemite Valley is open year-round numerous activities are available through the National Park Service, Yosemite Conservancy, Delaware North at Yosemite, including nature walks, photography art classes, stargazing programs, tours, bike rentals, rafting, mule horseback rides, rock climbing classes. Many people enjoy short walks longer hikes to waterfalls in Yosemite Valley, or walks among giant sequoias in the Mariposa, Tuolumne, or Merced Groves. Others like to drive or take a tour bus to Glacier Point (summer fall) to see a spectacular view of Yosemite Valley the high country, or drive along the scenic Tioga Road to Tuolumne Meadows (May October) go for a walk or hike.
Most park visitors stay just for the day, only visit locations within Yosemite Valley that are easily accessible by automobile. There is a US$25-30 per automobile user fee to enter the park, depending on the season. Traffic congestion in the valley is a serious problem during peak season, in summer. A free shuttle bus system operates year-round in the valley, park rangers encourage people to use this system since parking within the valley during the summer is often nearly impossible to find.
In addition to exploring the natural features of the park, visitors can learn about the natural cultural history of Yosemite Valley at a number of facilities in the valley: the Yosemite Valley Visitor Center, the adjoining Yosemite Museum, the Nature Center at Happy Isles. There are two National Historic Landmarks: the Sierra Club's LeConte Memorial Lodge (Yosemite's first public visitor center), the world-famous Ahwahnee Hotel. Camp 4 was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2003.



Over 800 miles (1,300 km) of trails are available to hikers anything from the easy stroll, to the grueling hikes up several park mountains, to multiple-day backpack trips.
The park can be divided into 5 sections for the day-user Yosemite Valley, Wawona/Mariposa Grove/Glacier Point, Tuolumne Meadows, Hetch Hetchy, Crane Flat/White Wolf. Numerous books describe park trails, free information is available from the Park Service in Yosemite. Park rangers encourage visitors to experience portions of the park in addition to Yosemite Valley.
Between late spring early fall, much of the park can be accessed for multiple-day backpacking trips. All overnight trips into the back country require a wilderness permit most require approved bear-resistant food storage.




While some locations in Yosemite require hiking, other locations can be reached via automobile transportation. Driving locations allow guests to observe the night sky in locations other than their campsite or lodge. All of the roads in Yosemite are scenic, but the most famous is the Tioga Road, typically open from late May or early June through November.
As an alternative to driving, bicycles are allowed on the roads. However, bicycles are only allowed off-road on 12 miles (19 km) of paved trails in Yosemite Valley itself; mountain biking is not allowed.



Rock climbing is an important part of Yosemite. Camp 4, a walk-in campground in Yosemite Valley, was instrumental in the development of rock climbing as a sport, is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Climbers can generally be spotted in the snow-free months on anything from ten-foot-high (3 m) boulders to the 3,300-foot (1.0 km) face of El Capitan. Classes are offered by numerous groups on rock climbing.




Yosemite Valley is open all year, although some roads within the park close in winter. Downhill skiing is available at the Badger Pass Ski Area the oldest downhill skiing area in California, offering downhill skiing from mid-December through early April. Much of the park is open to cross-country skiing snowshoeing, with several backcountry ski huts open for use. Wilderness permits are required for backcountry overnight ski trips.
The Bracebridge dinner is an annual holiday event, held since 1927 at the Ahwahnee Hotel, inspired by Washington Irving's descriptions of Squire Bracebridge English Christmas traditions of the 18th century in his Sketch Book. Between 1929 1973, the show was organized by Ansel Adams.



Bicycle rentals are available in Yosemite Valley spring through fall. Over 12 miles (19 km) of paved bike paths are available in Yosemite Valley. In addition, bicyclists can ride on regular roads. Helmets are required by law for children under 18 years of age. Off-trail riding mountain biking are not permitted in Yosemite National Park.
Water activities are plentiful during warmer months. Rafting can be done through the Yosemite Valley on the Merced River. There are swimming pools available at Yosemite Lodge Curry Village.

In 2010, Yosemite National Park was honored with its own quarter under the America the Beautiful Quarters program.




African-American Heritage Sites (U.S. National Park Service)
Buffalo Soldier
Cathedral Peak Granodiorite
Chinquapin, California
Fauna of the Sierra Nevada (U.S.)
List of books for further reading about the Sierra Nevada
List of plants of the Sierra Nevada (U.S.)
National Register of Historic Places in Yosemite National Park
Yosemite West, a community inside the gates of YNP










National Park Service: Yosemite National Park
The Yosemite Conservancy
Delaware North at Yosemite
Yosemite Park Organization at the Wayback Machine (archived July 16, 2010)
Information about camping at Yosemite National Park
Yosemite Hiking Information
The Role of the Railroads in Yellowstone Yosemite National Parks from American Studies at the University of Virginia
Media specific
Project Yosemite | Yosemite HD | Motion Timelapse Video
Historic Yosemite Indian Chiefs with photos at the Wayback Machine (archived May 21, 2006)
Historic Photographs of Yosemite National Park taken by Edith Irvine
Zoomable 17 Gigapixel images of Yosemite
Project Yosemite | An ongoing adventure to timelapse Yosemite in an extreme way
My First Summer in the Sierra by John Muir. Free MP3 audio recording from LibriVox.org