A young adult is generally a person in the age range of 20 to 39 (or 40), whereas an adolescent is a person aging from 13 to 19, although definitions opinions, such as Erik Erikson's stages of human development, vary. The young adult stage in human development precedes middle adulthood. A person in the middle adulthood stage ages from 40 (or 41) to 64. In old age, a person is 65 years old or older.



For a variety of reasons, timeliness on young adulthood cannot be exactly defined producing different results according to the different mix of overlapping indices (legal, maturational, occupational, sexual, emotional the like) employed, or on whether 'a developmental perspective...[or] the socialization perspective is taken. 'Sub-phases in this timetable of psychosocial growth patterns...are not rigid, both social change individual variations must be taken into account' not to mention regional cultural differences. Arguably indeed, with people living longer, reaching puberty earlier, 'age norms for major life events have become highly elastic' by the twenty-first century.
Some have suggested that, after ' Pre-adulthood...in the first 20 years or so...the second era, Early Adulthood, lasts from about age 17 to 45...the adult era of greatest energy abundance of greatest contradiction stress.' Within that framework, 'the Early Adult Transition (17 22) is a developmental bridge between pre-adulthood early adulthood', recognizing that 'the transition into adulthood is not a clear-cut dividing line'. One might alternatively speak of 'a Provisional Adulthood (18 30)...[&] the initiation to First Adulthood' as following that.
Despite all such fluidity, there is broad agreement that it is essentially the twenties thirties which constitute ' Early adulthood...the basis for what Levinson calls the Dream a vision of his [or her] goal's in life which provide motivation enthusiasm for the future'.



Young/prime adulthood can be considered the healthiest time of life young adults are generally in good health, subject neither to disease nor the problems of senescence. Biological function physical performance reach their peak from 20 35 years of age, waning after 35. Strength peaks around 25 years of age, plateaus through 35 40 years of age, then declines. Flexibility decreases with age throughout adulthood. However, there are large individual differences a fit 40-year-old may out-compete a sedentary 20-year-old.
Women reach their peak fertility in their early 20's. Assuming unprotected intercourse with a man of the same age, women aged 19 26 have about a 50% chance of becoming pregnant during a given menstrual cycle, compared with 40% in women of the 27 34 age range below 30% for women 35 39.
In developed countries, mortality rates for the 18 40 age group are typically very low. Men are more likely to die at this age than women, particularly in the 18 25 group: reasons include car accidents suicide. Mortality statistics among men women level off during the late twenties thirties, due in part to good health less risk-taking behavior.
Regarding disease, cancer is much less common in young than in older adults. Exceptions are testicular cancer, cervical cancer, Hodgkin's lymphoma. In sub-Saharan Africa, HIV/AIDS has hit the early adult population particularly hard. According to a United Nations report, AIDS has significantly increased mortality of between ages 20 to 55 for African males 20 to 45 for African females, reducing the life expectancy in South Africa by 18 years in Botswana by 34 years.



According to Erikson, in the wake of the adolescent emphasis upon identity formation, 'the young adult, emerging from the search for insistence on identity, is eager willing to fuse his identity with that of others. He [or she] is ready for intimacy, that is, the capacity to commit...to concrete affiliations partnerships.' To do so means the ability 'to face the fear of ego loss in situations which call for self-abandon: in the solidarity of close affiliations, in orgasms sexual unions, in close friendships in physical combat'. Avoidance of such experiences 'because of a fear of ego-loss may lead to a deep sense of isolation consequent self-absorption'.
Where isolation is avoided, the young adult may find instead that 'satisfactory sex relations...in some way take the edge off the hostilities potential rages caused by the oppositeness of male female, of fact fancy, of love hate'; may grow into the ability to exchange intimacy, love compassion.
In modern societies, young adults in their late teens early 20's encounter a number of issues as they finish school begin to hold full-time jobs take on other responsibilities of adulthood; 'the young adult is usually preoccupied with self-growth in the context of society relationships with others.' The danger is that in 'the second era, Early Adulthood...we must make crucially important choices regarding marriage, family, work, lifestyle before we have the maturity or life experience to choose wisely.'
While 'young adulthood is filled with avid quests for intimate relationships other major commitments involving career life goals', there is "a parallel pursuit for the formulation of a set of moral values". Erikson has argued that it is only now that what he calls the 'ideological mind' of adolescence gives way to 'that ethical sense which is the mark of the adult.'
Reaching adulthood in modern society is not always a linear or clean transition. As generations continue to adapt, new markers of adulthood are created that add different social expectations of what it means to be an adult.



Daniel Levinson suggested that the first phase of early adulthood comes to a close around twenty-eight to thirty, when 'at about 28 the provisional character of the twenties is ending life is becoming more serious...the age-thirty crisis.' Others have spoken of 'the Catch-30 Passage...between age 28 32', stressing that 'it is not uncommon, at the approach to the thirties, to tear up the life structure one put together to support the original dream of the twenties,' to start anew 'to create the basis for the next life structure.'
When 'the Age Thirty Transition' is a difficult one, 'in a severe crisis [s/]he experiences a threat to life itself, the danger of chaos dissolution, the loss of hope for the future.'



After the relative upheaval of the early 30's, the middle to late 30's are often characterized by settling down: 'the establishment phase', involving 'what we would call major life investments work, family, friends, community activities, values.' What has been termed 'the Culminating Life Structure for Early Adulthood (33 40) is the vehicle for completing this era realizing our youthful aspirations.' People in their thirties may increase the financial emotional investments they make in their lives, may have been employed long enough to gain promotions raises. They often become more focused on advancing their careers gaining stability in their personal lives 'with marriage child-rearing,' starting a family, coming to the fore as priorities.
Gail Sheehy, however, signposts the same twenties/thirties division rather differently, arguing that nowadays 'the twenties have stretched out into a long Provisional Adulthood', that in fact 'the transition to the Turbulent Thirties marks the initiation to First Adulthood.'



Young Adulthood then draws to its close with 'the Midlife Transition, from roughly age 40 to 45' producing 'a brand-new passage in the forties, when the transition from the end of First Adulthood to the beginning of Second Adulthood begins.'